# Machine-assisted agent-based modeling: opening the black box

Defining behavioral rules that reflect the heterogeneity of agents’ decision-making processes is crucial for the design of agent-based models. Rules typically rely on data about a particular system and the prior theoretical knowledge about processes and interactions involved, refined through extensive calibration tests. We propose using theory-supported machine learning (ML) to facilitate model development directly from data. To assure that our representation of the system conforms with theory, we use ML algorithms to find causal relationships between agents, and, also, to identify feedback loops among them. In addition to a behavioral agent-based model that we produce, we also open the ‘blackbox’ of purely empirical machine-driven modeling and generate a conceptual model that connects to theoretical knowledge and makes it easier to understand and communicate the ABM to stakeholders. In this way we can deliver important theoretical understanding of the system and explain the causal inferences involved. With our approach, artificial intelligence in the simulation modeling field can open a new stream in modeling practices and provide opportunities and insights for future applications.

# Data-driven Vs Theory-driven Agent-Based Model

Computational social science has seen a shift from theoretical models to empirical agent-based models (ABMs) grounded in data-driven correlations between behavioral factors defining agents’ decisions. The community’s interest in theoretical ABMs with behavioral theories setting stylized rules that guide agents’ actions is fading, especially when it concerns policy-related simulations. However, it remains unclear to what extent theory-driven ABMs mislead, if at all, possible policy decisions when compared to the outcomes of models with empirical micro-foundations. This is especially relevant for pro-environemntal policies that increasingly rely on quantifying cumulative effects of individual behavioral changes, where ABMs are so useful. To address this methodological dilemma, we propose a comparison framework to quantitatively explore the differences between theory- and data-driven ABMs. Inspired by the existing theory-based model, ORVin-T, which studies the individual choice between organic and conventional products, we designed a survey to collect data on individual preferences and purchasing decisions. We then used this extensive empirical microdata to build an empirical twin, ORVin-E, replacing the theoretical assumptions and secondary aggregated data used to parametrize agents’ decision strategies with empirical survey data. We compare the models in terms of key outputs, perform sensitivity analysis and three policy scenario.

# Agent-Based Model:Consumer Behavior

Based on theoretical and empirical considerations, ORVin is developed to understand consumer purchasing behavior regarding organic wines. To gain insight into the process of wine consumption, the theory of planned behavior is considered along with alphabet theory and goal framing theory. This provides a solid theoretical framework for identifying behavioral factors including beliefs, attitudes, norms, habits, and goals that may influence organic wine purchases. The model can be used to examine the effectiveness of different interventions for encouraging households to purchase organic wine instead of conventional wine. ORVin provides a dynamic platform to study the individual reaction of the disaggregated, low-level actors of the system to the hypothetical changes in the wine market such as taxation, marketing campaigns, and promotions. The cumulative impacts of changing behavior are also evaluated with respect to the environment. This model improves users understanding of the complexity of wine purchasing decisions and help them to further interpret and forecast organic wine market.
